[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: We're
all familiar with the terms
meme and zeitgeist.
But how many of you
have heard of egregores?
Mark Stavish is here today
to share his research
on the effect of
collective belief
and its extension called
egregores, virtual beings that
can influence, even control
our collective experience
and individual choices.
Welcome, Mark, what
a fascinating book.
>>MARK STAVISH: Thank you.
It's a pleasure to be here.
>>REGINA: You know,
and it brings up some,
I think it really helps clarify
some issues we have about
controlling forces because
so many people watching this
have come to accept
that we have guides,
that there are dark entities.
And certainly, Hollywood
has done its share
of pumping that notion up.
But the way you handle it is
very intelligent because a lot
of it has to do with us.
It has to do with
what we've personally
created within our own minds.
And so let's go ahead and
start with a definition.
What is an egregore?
And I've written a whole
bunch of different notions
in your book of what is
considered to be an egregore.
Define egregore first.
>>STAVISH: Well, an
egregore, it's a Greek word.
And no one says it properly.
You're the best.
You've come closest to anyone.
I think egregore.
And someone told me--
>>REGINA: I wouldn't
have guessed that.
>>STAVISH: Someone told me
it's like the first g is
silent as in gnome.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
No, I didn't get it.
>>STAVISH: It's potato, potato.
So we just go with
what we've got.
And it really is a
collective consciousness.
And people are familiar
with that term,
particularly from Jungian
studies and psychology.
But we have to ask,
how does it function?
And that's what makes an
egregore very important.
So an egregore is really a
social control mechanism.
It's a limiting factor.
Because whenever we're within
a group, there are certain
limits as to our thoughts and
actions within that group.
But we often don't
think about it.
>>REGINA: No we don't.
And it's influencing us all
the time, whether we know it
or not.
>>STAVISH: Probably one of
the most disturbing aspects
of this book is when people
read it, they suddenly
realize how many egregores
or collective awarenesses
they're involved with.
And it often brings
with it this sense
of helplessness or denial.
Like what do you mean
I'm involved with this
or these things
are influencing me?
But when you step back
and you think about it,
you realize, well,
I'm involved with I
have an egregore at work.
We call it a corporate culture.
We have an egregore
maybe in our community.
We call that
community standards.
We have an egregore in
our spiritual groups
or spiritual practices
and even with our family.
But these are different types
of collective awarenesses.
And some of them, we
voluntarily get involved with,
others just by our geography.
But what makes
this interesting is
that there's two
definitions to an egregore
or two descriptions of them.
One of them is the
classical notion.
And this is what I like
to focus on with folks.
And the other is
the modern notion.
The modern notion is
this collective awareness
comes together any time
we have a group of people
forming a group for a
particular activity.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: So that means
some of these egregores
can come and go.
Then you have the
classical notion,
which has us down here on
terra firma and some kind
of psychic or spiritual
entity on the other end
and this conduit of energy
that connects the two.
And that's the classical notion.
So I think for viewers, one
of the things about egregores
that they need to focus
on is their philosophical
and spiritual and
political egregores
are the ones that will
often have the strongest
pull on them.
>>REGINA: Oh, and they
certainly do right now
in the world at large and
in the US in particular.
>>STAVISH: When we
look at the involvement
that we have in
various groups, one
of the things we have
to notice particularly
in our spiritual activities
and our political activities
is that they always
seek to involve us
into identification
with something
bigger than ourselves.
And that's wonderful because
we want to contribute.
We want our lives to
have value and meaning.
So we often want to
associate with a movement
that promises to make
the world a better place.
But what we notice with
particular spiritual movements
and political movements
is that the egregore
becomes an end in and of
itself in that it essentially
abuses our goodwill.
And one of the
points of the book
is to get people to ask
themselves a question, what
is it I want my life to mean?
How am I going to achieve
that goal of meaning?
And when I participate in
these group activities,
am I getting out of
what I was promised?
>>REGINA: Right.
And when we get toward the
last part of this interview,
we're going to really go into
the essentially self help
element of this of how
we break those control
mechanisms over our lives.
But first, I think it's good
to really establish just
how deeply they
reach into our lives.
>>STAVISH: Well, just
take a look at the news.
I mean, identity politics
is politics today.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: And
it's always if you
look at how people
are being described,
it's always in terms of
membership in a group
as if that is the major
or primary defining
characteristics of their being.
Well, for some people, it may
be, but maybe not for everyone.
So the more we identify with
just these narrow identifiers
is what it is.
It's a narrowing factor.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: Then we don't think
about things outside of it.
That's why I said it's a
social control mechanism.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Let's look at this
mechanically for a moment.
So we know in the world
of the quantum reality
that thoughts are things,
that everything is a thought,
and it forms itself,
a thought form that
ultimately creates through time,
intention, care, dedication.
It will sink down into a
physical reality, whether it's
someone that's dreamt
of a painting that
becomes reality or a show
between the two of us sitting
here.
So on the thought form
realm, if an egregore,
classically
speaking, are thought
forms that we have collectively
rendered, so to speak,
or agreed upon
together, if an egregore
is the thought form
that's been reinforced
by multiple numbers
of people that
takes on a life of
its own, at what point
is that density so profound
that it creates an entity?
Does it just take the
repetition of something
through time to create this?
I want to give people
a visual understanding
of how we create these things
that we then become slaves to.
>>STAVISH: Well,
it's very simple.
We get in love with our ideas.
We fall in love with our
ideas and our notions
and our creations.
And I think there's a
famous painting out there,
of course, the artist who falls
in love with his creation.
OK?
So this is OK to some degree.
>>REGINA: But we're
impassioning it.
>>STAVISH: We're
The difference is
when does it move
from being something which we
create and enliven into when
it influences us and dominates?
>>REGINA: Its own
independent identity.
>>STAVISH: It's own identity.
So we have to look at the
notion of the thought form.
All egregores are
thoughts forms.
But not all thought
forms are egregores.
Because the difference
is if we have an idea,
I have a goal in my life,
I want to write a book,
I want to have a show, I want
to run a successful business,
all of this involves all the
steps which you've discussed,
which you've outlined.
The difference is we have to
bring other people into that
to help make it happen often.
That is OK, a kind of an
egregore that we start.
The difference is that in most
of our day to day experiences,
these are not negative.
These are OK.
We need them to
get through life.
But when we move into these
often very philosophical
and profound areas where
things can be very abstract,
particularly religion,
philosophy, and politics, where
people can get so hung up on
an idea that they'll die for it
or kill for it,
that's when you know
are you really sure
about this idea?
>>REGINA: So this is where it's
really fueled with emotion.
>>STAVISH: Emotion,
that's the key.
Because the entities,
and we're going
to talk about it from
the classical view,
there is a spiritual
entity at the other end
of this that may or may not have
your best interests at heart.
>>REGINA: Right.
Once the entity's been formed
and taken its own identity.
>>STAVISH: Well, not so--
>>REGINA: Or are you saying
actual other entities
in other realms?
>>STAVISH: There's others,
other entities in other realms.
>>REGINA: That are taking
advantage of the egregore?
>>STAVISH: Because in
the classical world,
the priest craft would
create this conduit
to an intelligence.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: See, the
problem with human beings
is they're willfully
human centric.
We often think of the
cosmos only in terms of us.
Maybe we think of our pets.
Maybe we think of
the animals we eat.
But we really don't give
much thought or consideration
to the host of invisible beings
that could exist in the cosmos.
And they may not all have
your best interests at heart,
just as not everyone walking
around on terra firma does.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>STAVISH: We talk about
as above, so below.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>STAVISH: But we
often don't really
think about what that means.
So the emotion is
the fuel of it all.
So when you find that your
emotions are running away
from you, that you don't
even understand where
these feelings are coming from,
and they're so impassioned,
that's when maybe this is the
tail's wagging the dog now.
>>REGINA: So you
would look at it
in a very extreme case, the
famous news footage of Hitler
standing in Nuremberg
in the stadium above all
of these people feeling them
into a frenzy, so to speak?
>>STAVISH: Very much so.
>>REGINA: So that
is an egregore that
has been created among
the people that is now
they are now hostage to on a
psychospiritual and emotional
level.
And you're saying that on
the other side of that,
that fuel that's
been created may
be being manipulated and
used by another force
for its own interests.
>>STAVISH: Correct, and that
would be the same with anything
that you see extremism involved.
I mean, communism's another one.
I mean, that bad
boy just won't die.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: And it's
constantly being reinvented
as if somehow it's OK.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: You
see the same thing
with a lot of sporting events
when they just break out
into this kind of hostility.
>>REGINA: Oh, no, this is true.
I mean, I don't think I've
ever been as frightened as when
I was at a Texas OU game
sitting in the bleachers
with 100,000 people
stomping their feet.
I literally wanted to get out
of there because that thing was
dangerous.
It would take over.
>>STAVISH: Well, and
you look at it now
and then there are other kinds.
These are easy to see.
And I think this is
why we're talking about
because they are extreme.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: And that's really
important to point out.
The examples I give in the
book, the examples we're
talking about here, we're
using very black and white ones
so that we can begin
to set a framework up
for internal reflection
on our relationships.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>STAVISH: But they can often
be more subtle or insidious.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So we get a picture of the
really dense gross ones.
So let's get into
some definitions
that different people,
different ways in which this
was described in your book.
Should I just pop through a few
and then you comment on them?
>>STAVISH: Whatever you want.
>>REGINA: OK.
Psyche and physical embodiment
of ideologies and systems.
That seems self
explanatory, right?
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>REGINA: Energy complex as
living beings that must be fed
and nurtured.
Now that part we need to
get into a little bit.
And we're going to go
further into it later.
Fed and nurtured?
>>STAVISH: Well,
for your viewers,
most of them are involved,
if not all of them,
in some kind of
spiritual practice.
Often, these spiritual
practices can
involve some kind of ideation,
idealizing, I should say,
idealizing of a person or of an
entity, a god form of some kind
or deity.
We see this throughout Hinduism,
Buddhism, Tibetan Buddhism.
We see this in the
classical mythologies.
And there is a form of
worship or devotion.
Devotion is the key.
We're all constantly told
devotion, devotion, devotion,
even to the teacher,
devotion to the teacher.
And what is devotion?
But it is a heartfelt
opening or receptivity
to what they have to offer
you, but it's emotional.
It is not intellectual.
It is not analytical.
I mean, you're often
told, don't analyze this.
Don't think about this.
Now sometimes, it even
goes so far as to say,
don't even criticize it,
well, maybe not at the time.
Afterwards, maybe
some will encourage
you to think about it.
But it's that emotionalism
that is the hook because it
can feel so wonderful.
And anyone who's been to a
revival meeting or some kind
of even in an NA or AA
meeting where people
are telling their
heartfelt stories,
you can just feel that emotion.
How many times
have people watched
a movie and they begin to cry?
>>REGINA: Right/
>>STAVISH: How many
people watched a movie
and they begin to feel sorrow
or sadness or happiness and joy?
We're far more easily
emotionally manipulated
than we tend to believe.
>>REGINA: So that's
how it's feeding us.
Now how are those emotions
then feeding and pumping up
the strength of the egregore?
>>STAVISH: It's a relationship.
It's a two way street.
>>REGINA: It's a
self-feeding loop.
>>STAVISH: It's a
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STAVISH: Now the thing
is they often have to grow.
That's why you see the
idealism is the emphasis.
We're going to save the world.
We're going to make the
better world a better place.
We're going to turn
it into utopia.
But that means what
do we have to do?
We got to spread the word.
We've got to
recruit more people.
We've got to absorb more
people into the movement.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm, more
emotion, more energy.
>>STAVISH: More emotion,
more energy, more feeding.
>>REGINA: And
again, the X factor
is you don't know what's on
the other side of the egregore.
>>STAVISH: You don't.
And this is where you
have to ask yourself
the question again and again.
I'll say it throughout
the interview.
Am I getting out of this
what I was promised?
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, another one here.
Is group consciousness
formed by serious initiates?
Now you touched on this
a little while ago,
where you have initiates
of various faiths, which
intentionally come together
to create this commonly
held belief or this
egregore to reach
into other realms of entities.
Talk about that a little bit.
>>STAVISH: Well, again, as we
saw in the classical period
where the priesthood
would intentionally
create these rituals and
actions and forms of worship
to make contact
and communication
with the invisible realms,
we see the same thing
going on today in a variety
of organizations and movements
intentionally.
And some of them are actively
involved in religion or cultism
or metaphysics.
And again, these can be
with very good intentions,
and at times, can have
very good results.
I want to be clear on that.
But because these
are living entities,
they have a life cycle.
And just as people
and organizations
have a beginning, a middle, a
decline, and possibly an end,
so can these psychic
entities, these egregores.
And when they go toxic, when
they're not getting fed,
or when they're in
the state of decay,
that's when they become
the most dangerous to us
spiritually because that's
when people become dogmatic.
They become extremely
dogmatic on the view.
>>REGINA: Entrenched.
>>STAVISH: Entrenched, yes.
And you can see that because
people are no longer working
from experience.
They're working from,
we'll say, the written word
or what they were told, but
not from personal experience.
>>REGINA: So now this is
creating a divisiveness--
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>REGINA: --whenever
there is that dogmatism.
>>STAVISH: Because your
spirituality should always
ultimately be about your
individual experience
and how you can come to
understand that clearly
and precisely and
usefully in your life.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
when they go super toxic.
Let's talk about
groups that are more
oriented toward the dark
side, blood sacrifice,
so on and so forth.
Throughout history,
it's been very common.
It still happens today.
So what did you learn
in your research
when the intention
is dark to begin with
and you create a very,
very dark egregore,
and then what can happen
on the other side of it?
>>STAVISH: Well, nothing
good comes of this.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>STAVISH: I mean,
this is the problem
and because the beginning is
always very selfish, always.
It's always just about me.
Even if you're involved
with other people,
ultimately, it's
really you're just
involved with it because of
what you hope to get out of it.
>>REGINA: Power, usually power.
>>STAVISH: It's
almost always power.
And the toxicity of
power, the power complex,
which is an article that was
recently posted on my blog
by a guest author who is
a Jungian psychoanalyst,
really talks about
that is that power
complex we see in
all of these groups
both supposedly geared towards
the light and those not.
But when you're involved in
the life force, of course,
as we hear it's
getting near Halloween,
and Dracula always said,
the life is in the blood,
but that is true because
that is the carrier
of the psychic energies,
the prana or the qi.
And when that is
concentrated and released,
the belief is, among
various esoteric groups,
that is how you can grab
that, you can manipulate it,
and you can direct it to feed
whatever spiritual entity
you're dedicating it to.
And that's really very
important because that
is the function of the purpose
of these ancient sacrifices
or even if they
are going on today.
The problem is
that it is already
started from such a negative
and selfish perspective
that the people
involved, ultimately,
are going to come
to no good end.
Just nothing good
can come from it.
I think maybe what
is related to this,
though, is when healthy
aggregates go toxic.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: And we talked
about that in the book.
We gave an example, very extreme
example, again, very extreme
just so that people
would see worst case
scenario, in which
folks were involved
in a well-known esoteric order.
And most of the
leadership ended up
coming down with
the commonalities
of blood diseases, all
very rare diseases.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: It wasn't, oh,
this one got pneumonia,
or this one got
whatever, the flu.
It's all with the same kind
of strange, peculiar blood
disorders.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: So one
of the physicians
who was involved with the
group talked to me about this
and said, these are oddities.
These are outliers, anomalies.
Why so we have so many of them
concentrated in this group?
What do they all have in common?
And unfortunately, that
group in particular
placed a great deal of emphasis
on the notion of the egregore.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, and the egregore can be
even, for example, Horace,
Jesus, Muhammad, all the
masters of influence, right?
>>STAVISH: Sure.
>>REGINA: Buddha, right?
>>STAVISH: They are because
you see that happening today.
I mean, Jacques Valei
said it quite accurately.
We're involved in the bloody
brutal for celebrity status
in order to get our message out
there and to be listened to.
And when you do this,
there's an apotheosis
that takes place, the
elevation to divine being.
We see that in the rotunda
of the Capitol building
where George
Washington is elevated.
>>REGINA: Yes, he's
elevated to deity.
>>STAVISH: To deity status.
And we see it, I mean, go to
any college campus in September,
and you're going to see posters
of Marilyn Monroe, James
Dean, Che--
I mean, come on, it's
been quite a while
since these folks
have been alive.
Yet, we continue to elevate
them to this status.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STAVISH: Why?
Because we see them
as an embodiment
of the classical
symbolism of Venus.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: Marilyn Monroe
was Venus incarnate.
James Dean, he's the bad boy.
Where does he fit in there?
He's not quite--
>>REGINA: He's sensitive
and misunderstood.
And he runs afoul of
everybody as a result of it.
>>STAVISH: So there's a Greek
god that he personifies,
and that's really
important to notice.
That we as people, and we
talk, as above, so below,
and we talk about our charts
and astrology, but each of us
has aspects of planetary
energies or deities--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>STAVISH: --that we embody.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: We're very mercurial.
Why?
Because we're talking
and communicating
and all of this stuff.
Just so your listeners
can be watching,
your viewers can begin to
think about it in themselves.
But then you take someone
like Che Guevara, I mean,
he was Castro's assassin.
He was a murderer.
And yet, we sell posters
of him in college campuses
as if he's a hero.
>>REGINA: Yeah, he's idolized.
Yeah, exactly.
What about corporations?
Because it seems like one
of the biggest egregores
would be corporate--
what do you call it?
Culture?
Now they call it
corporate culture.
>>STAVISH: Yes, corporate
culture is the biggest one.
Well, two of them,
corporate culture
and political correctness.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: These are the
two biggest egregores today.
And they intersect through the
priesthood of the department
of human resources.
That's where they come together.
So when we look at
a corporate culture,
it is an egregore
that you voluntarily
agree to participate in.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And it's interesting,
because there
are have been experimental
corporate cultures,
and there have been more
democratic corporate cultures
that do come along
from time to time,
where the employees are even
the primary shareholders.
And there you see, and this
I'm getting into for a reason,
it's just as with
religions and gods.
And I have it written
down this way,
you have certain
corporate egregores
where you obey and you worship.
And you have others
where there's
appreciation and gratitude.
Same, it's offering
something, but distinctly
different in its intention,
how it's taken up and received,
and the comfort of the person
on the giving end of it.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so in most
corporations, it's top down.
>>STAVISH: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: Right?
Boom.
And that's worship and obey.
That's like almost like
lower gods, lower religions,
so to speak.
And that dominates
most of our planet,
not even to get into the
notion of political structures.
But people who are plugged
in through corporate systems
and then their sheer extension
through mass media, which
is the next one we'll get
into, to influence our thinking
and manipulate us into buying
their product and so forth
is very much a hierarchical
top down structure
the majority of the time.
And we're just used to it.
>>STAVISH: Well, to really
look at this carefully,
we like to think that
magic has gone away.
However, Ioan
Couliano in his book,
"Eros and Magic in
the Renaissance,"
described very carefully
the survival of magic
particularly through
corporate industrial complexes
and government complexes.
And having come from
communist Romania,
he was quite aware of the role
of social control mechanisms,
media and corporate
combinations to keep people
thinking and acting
on particular lines.
And his book is really something
that everyone should read.
>>REGINA: Tell us
his name again.
>>STAVISH: Couliano.
The book is "Eros and
Magic in the Renaissance."
>>REGINA: OK.
>>STAVISH: The University
of Chicago Press.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>STAVISH: And of
course, he focuses mostly
on the writings
of Giordano Bruno.
And Bruno's book, "On
the Bonds in General,"
it's kind of a
boring title, but it
was written nine years
before he was executed,
burned at the stake in
1600 in the center of Rome.
And that book in
particular is probably
more important than
Machiavelli's "The Prince,"
because "The Prince"
talks about power
in terms of very conventional
ways of acquiring it.
But Bruno's book talks
about in terms of,
what is the role of influence?
How do we influence
the individual?
And how do we
influence the masses?
And how we do that through
symbols and signs and images?
The power of the image,
the power of the brand,
the power of the logo, the
power of the slogan or mantra,
the spell, the enchantment
that takes place
through constant repetition
and exposure to these things.
>>REGINA: Add music
to it, which goes
deep into the emotional
aspect of being to boost it
and the repetition of the slogan
with the music repeatedly,
for example, and you have
something hardwired enough
you'll remember it
on your deathbed.
I still know all the jingles
from the various products
in my childhood.
>>STAVISH: I was just
going to say that.
How often have you
found yourself,
you're doing your dishes,
you're doing something,
and some song's in your--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>REGINA: (SINGING) --good
at dirt and grime and grease
and just--
No, it's true.
I mean, we think,
oh, a lot of people
say, well, I don't
work for a corporation.
I got out of the corporate
life a long time ago,
and no more top down with me.
However, we are succumbing to
it with these subtle messagings
if we are dialed in
at all to, I think,
mass media and the
messaging systems around us.
It takes an incredible
amount of personal definition
and will to be able to live
beyond these egregoric messages
coming through to us constantly.
>>STAVISH: It's
increasingly difficult
and because of the
degree to which we're
wired in all the time.
People really do
need to disconnect
and be very selective.
Now we don't want to
create an echo chamber.
I mean, that's just
an egregore of itself.
That's another social
control mechanism.
You don't want to create an
echo chamber where all you hear
is what you want to hear.
But you do have to be
selective and limit
the amount of
exposure that you have
to media and particular
types of media
and begin to analyze
the media that you're
exposed to more carefully.
Because again, this topic has
two areas of consideration.
One is what we think of
as general mass media
and mass psychology, and
that's very important.
There's been a tremendous
amount of information
written about that even
in the '50s and '60s.
But then we move
beyond that into
the psychospiritual aspect,
the metaphysical aspect.
And that's saying
these things just
don't end with our brain pans.
They just don't end
with our thoughts.
We are connected to some kind
of psychic or emotional force
here.
And we have to know
what that is and if we
want that relationship.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And one of the documentaries
I think is it's a terrible.
I mean, you can
find it on YouTube.
It's very low quality in terms
of the resolution and all.
Even if you buy it
it's, low quality.
But it's called "Century of
Self," a British film maker.
And it has to do with Edward
Bernays, the nephew of Freud,
and now the media started
taking on its role
and turning into probably
the most powerful
of all egregores
in the manipulation
of mass consciousness.
>>STAVISH: Well, it's a very
significant documentary.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: And the
reason being is
that if you just watch the
first few minutes of it--
when I taught public speaking
at the university level,
I used to have my
students watch it.
And I was the only person in
the communications department
that actually had
their students watch.
>>REGINA: My husband has
his students watch it too.
>>STAVISH: About manipulation.
>>REGINA: Yes, exactly.
>>STAVISH: The bias
I would say about it
is it focuses only on Western
Europe and the United States
and ignores the
fact that there is
widespread manipulation in
the East Block, which is maybe
even cruder and worse.
But that said, if you look
at what Bernays is saying,
prior to World
War I, advertising
had to do with selling
you a product based
on its utilitarian value.
Afterwards, it's based
upon pomp and appeal.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: And then there's
even the manipulation of ideas.
How does he turn
cigarette smoking--
>>REGINA: That was a brilliant.
>>STAVISH: --into the early
women's liberation movement?
>>REGINA: That is the
part that really struck
me is how for pure profit,
even though it's absolutely
against our best interests, it's
going to take our health down,
create rising cancer rates, I
mean, it's just awful what it's
set to do to society, and the
elegant and sexy way they sell
it to us, so you must engage.
You know?
>>STAVISH: Well, that's
the important word is sexy.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: That's
the critical word.
Because if we look at the
book I just mentioned,
"Eros and Magic," eroticism,
the emotional appeal
of what we love, what
we're passionate about
starts first in terms
of human relationships.
So then we take that and
manipulate that and use that.
So when we look at all the
things in the news today, OK,
and I wrote something about
this last week sometime,
there's a reason why it
all focuses around sex
because it's unavoidable.
As much as we may want
to try, it's unavoidable.
So we use that as
the hook because that
is the beginning of the
pleasure principle in people.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: So we all
want to feel good.
Buddhism says that.
What do we all want?
We all want to be happy.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: OK?
It talks about the four blisses
as these psychic channels open
up and a goodly so-called
kundalini goes through them
and you have the
awakening through--
OK the four blisses of
the four main chakras.
OK, so we all want to feel good.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: So if I can find
out two things, and Bruno talks
about this, Tibetan
Buddhism talks about it,
any manipulator
in the world knows
it, what is it that you want,
and what is it that you fear?
If I can find those two things
out, or at least one of them,
I can hook you, and
I can direct you.
>>REGINA: Well, I
only need to look
to pharmaceutical advertisements
to see extreme examples of both
of those.
Oh my god, talk
about an egregore.
Oh, holy cow.
OK.
Anyway, you just
touched on Buddha.
OK, let's talk about
another differentiation
even within the Buddhist world,
the Tibetan tulpa versus tulku.
>>STAVISH: The reason I used
that example in the book
is because many of your
viewers are probably
very familiar with the writings
of Alexandra David-Neel.
And if they're not,
they should be.
In particular, read
a biography on her.
She's just fantastic.
I mean, her life
story is just great.
And It ranks up
there with reading
some of the better biographies
on Madame Blavatsky.
No matter what you say
about her, I don't care.
She's just a phenomenal
story of a person to read.
>>REGINA: Are you talking about
Alexandra or Madame Blavatsky?
>>STAVISH: Both of them.
>>REGINA: I agree with that.
I mean, a wild character
definitely, hugely conflicted
in a lot of areas, but there
are a lot of brilliance.
Alexandra?
>>STAVISH: David-Neel.
>>REGINA: David, yeah.
>>STAVISH: And she was in
Tibet in the '20s and '30s.
And she helped bring
Tibetan Buddhism to the West
in many ways.
And she wrote in her book,
"Magic and Mystery in Tibet,"
about the thought form.
This is where we first get this
notion of a thought form taking
on a life of its own.
She tells this story about how
she visualized this monk, how
the monks became tangibly
visible over months of effort
to people around her.
And then it started to
take on an attitude.
And she had to go through
this tremendous effort
to dissolve it because it was
no longer this jolly monk.
It was getting malicious.
There are people who
have talked about this
and debated whether
it's real or not.
I don't think that matters
because it passes, what I call,
the duck test.
Does it walk like a duck?
Does it act like a duck?
OK, it's a duck.
And we know that
thought forms play
an important role in almost all
Eastern practices and studies.
The notion that thoughts create
a vehicle for spiritual forces
to come through, that's
the whole focus around much
of the deity worship.
So we have that notion of the
tulpa, OK, the thought form.
And that is taken on
its own kind of meme
within the internet
But then we have
the tulku, and that
is a reincarnation of
supposedly an enlightened being
or great teacher.
But they both have their idea.
They're both rooted in
the idea of an intention.
I create within my mind the
desire for this to happen,
and it will.
And it's not as complex
as people think.
I always remember my grandmother
saying she wanted two things.
One is to die in her sleep.
And the other is to be a concert
pianist in her next life.
So since she died
in her sleep, I'll
assume she'll get
the next one too.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I'm with your grandma.
I want to be a singer
in my next life.
>>STAVISH: And so that's it, I
mean, if our thoughts are real
and they are dense enough
through repeated affirmation
and focus, then what
happens to them?
Where do they go?
And there you have a
wonderful story of dialogue
between David-Neel and
Omama and of course, it's
written in
conventional language,
so some people say it
probably didn't happen.
But my guess is she is
repeating the essence
of the conversation, rather
than it word for word.
She says, well, do these
people die simply of fear
when they do this
certain practice?
Are the demons
real or is it just
their own thoughts take over?
And he said, well, when
you go into a jungle,
you can believe that
tigers aren't real,
but they can still eat you.
So there's the tigers
of our own thoughts,
and then there's
the tigers created
by the thoughts of others.
>>REGINA: And I think
everybody watching
this understands being
consumed by one's own thoughts.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>REGINA: We've all
been at the receiving
end of the damage that
has been caused us
as a result of amplifying
our own thoughts repeatedly
in a negative direction.
>>STAVISH: And now
we're being asked,
but even are your
thoughts your own now?
And that's where
people get afraid.
That's where this gets
really scary for them
because they suddenly
realize that maybe that's not
my goal in life.
That's not what I want.
This thought isn't mine.
>>REGINA: No.
And if you're living
a life on autopilot,
the likelihood the thoughts
are even less your own.
>>STAVISH: True.
>>REGINA: If you're not
consciously choosing your days,
choosing your moments,
choosing your engagements.
And a lot of people
aren't anymore.
So let me ask you
this, because, I mean,
I have a very long script here.
I've written a ton of
questions for you, which
because we're having such
a fascinating discussion,
I'm not going to get--
>>STAVISH: Invite me back.
>>REGINA: I will.
And we're not going
to get to all of it.
But one of the things
I was thinking about
is for the millennials,
for example,
which are involved in mass
media as in social media
on a constant basis.
So you're really not in a mode
to choose your next moment.
You're responding to
someone else's intrusion
on your life via these
devices and such.
So what would a classic
egregore, for example,
be of the millennials,
millennials
or all of those that are
addicted to social media
and on their screen
many hours a day?
>>STAVISH: Well, one of the
jokes we have is they're
all so hip and individualistic,
they all look alike.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>STAVISH: So
really ask yourself,
is this really your
fashion decisions?
Are they your own?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: What's
the purpose of this?
What's the statement
you're trying to make?
We come on, and we
look at how we're
going to present ourselves.
This is all part of
crafting an image.
But it has a purpose.
So does what the
millennial go through.
It has a purpose.
We think very
carefully about ours.
OK?
The question is, are you
thinking carefully about yours?
>>REGINA: Well, that's
what I'm asking.
>>STAVISH: What is the
image you're presenting?
And with that, you have
to say, where do you
get your ideas
from about how you
should think and act and eat and
dress and do all these things?
Are they truly yours?
Do you truly want them?
The problem is the
images, and they're
so focused and so
hooked on images,
particularly through
their phones,
that it's increasingly difficult
to get people to disengage.
>>REGINA: Right.
And what struck me
about this because it's
showing the contrast to it.
I was in a coffee shop recently
and talking to the young girls
there.
And I think a pot of
tea, apparently, I
had ordered an exotic one,
but literally enough for a cup
and a half with $6, I said, how
do you guys afford to even have
drinks in your own shop here?
You know?
And they said, well,
we're just used
to not having a lot of money.
But we make money for, we
make space in our budget
for being at these
kinds of places.
But we don't ever hope
to own a home or anything
that you guys have.
They said, but there's a trade.
We're saddled with
horrible student loans.
We feel like were
slaves to that.
And these two
girls are finishing
each other's sentences.
But we have a freedom
that you didn't have.
We have a freedom to
just accept each other.
And I understood what they were
talking about because of all
the various agendas
and such that
are now more mainstream for
them in their generation.
But I thought, how much
freedom do you really have when
your face is here in response
mode rather than choice
mode all day?
>>STAVISH: And I would even
say the word isn't response.
It's react.
>>REGINA: React.
OK.
That's even better.
>>STAVISH: And I don't
mean to nit pick there.
>>REGINA: No, no, no.
It's true.
>>STAVISH: But to
respond means that we've
put some thought into it.
This is just habituated.
It's habituated.
And this is what I'm saying,
the thing about an egregore
is it habituates you.
>>REGINA: Well, I mean, I'm a
little concerned about this.
I mean, I think there are some
real geniuses in the younger
generations, even younger
than the millennials.
There are some brilliant people
in all generations out there.
But as a group to have
been raised in this way,
I'm really concerned
about what is
the egregore that is going to
essentially whip them around
by its tail.
Because as you say,
egregores create
a, whether you call
yourself spiritual or not,
it is a spiritual slavery.
>>STAVISH: Well, that's the key.
And if you don't have
real freedom of choices,
if you don't have control over
your life, or at least more
control over your life and the
things that you do, then who
and what does?
And when I look at, as you say,
the millennial generation--
>>REGINA: Or younger,
way younger, yeah.
>>STAVISH: --or younger, I'm not
seeing the ability to choose.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's what I'm seeing.
>>STAVISH: And that because
so much is being automated,
there's not even a process,
a reflection process.
So you have to
disengage, first of all,
and you have to make
a plan for your life.
If you just sit back
and accept the fact
that, well, I'm saddled
by this, and I'm never
going to own a home, you've
made that choice now.
And I'm not saying it's easy.
It's not.
I mean, I have a son in college.
I have another one
coming in after.
I know what this is like.
However, you still have
to then even be sharper
than the average tack.
You have to even step more
out of the collective.
Because what it is is what
we're hearing from them
is not choice, but
misery loves company.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: That's what
we're really hearing.
>>REGINA: That is right.
>>STAVISH: Misery loves company.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's not a good meme
under any circumstances.
But I just wanted to
know your opinion on that
because we're talking about a
whole generation, generations
of upcoming leaders
in this world.
>>STAVISH: Well,
they're not the leaders.
>>REGINA: I know, but they're
going to be of age where--
>>STAVISH: They're
the followers.
>>REGINA: They're the followers,
and unfortunately, far more so
than previous generations
that weren't hooked into this.
But this is done by design.
What is the entity on the
other side of that egregore?
That's what I wonder.
>>STAVISH: Well, it's
only speculation.
>>REGINA: Of course, it is.
>>STAVISH: But I do
like to point out,
much to the annoyance
of many people,
I said, I remember in
the '80s, the 90s, 2000s,
we have this fantastic
utopian vision being
fed to us by the New Age
movement and even earlier.
I mean, everything is how
perfect it was going to be.
And on the other side, we have
the fundamentalist Christians
we're getting most parts
saying, digital implants and bar
scanners, the mark of
the beast, and one world
government, and one world
religion, and all this stuff.
And of course, they
would be mocked for it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: And then I'd
go down the laundry list
with my friends, I'd
say, OK, now which
one appeared to have a better
idea as to what was going on?
I mean, you got folks in Sweden
now getting subdermal implants
so that it's to scan things.
That is really what
we're looking at.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: What we're seeing is
primarily out of Silicon Valley
is where most of
this is taking place,
and we have to go
back a few decades.
And this is where history
is really important.
I mean, prior to the show, I was
talking to some of your staff
about research that had gone
on in the '30 between telepathy
and mass media, particularly
through NBC and Zenith Radio
Corporation and even
some of the BBC.
But what we're seeing in
Silicon Valley, the heart
of the so-called
progressive politics,
is the great marriage
of totalitarianism.
>>REGINA: Yes OK
>>STAVISH: And that great
marriage of totalitarianism
is taking place on the corporate
level and the university level.
And people like to talk about
Eisenhower's final speech
where he said, beware of the
military industrial complex.
But they don't actually
read the speech.
Because very specifically, he
mentioned universities as well.
It should have been the military
industrial educational complex.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes,
educational complex.
Absolutely.
>>STAVISH: Because at that
marriage point in the '60
and into the '80s
is where we saw
in parallel offices, the
development of the internet
and also in technology
computer technology,
we know it, but also
psychic research.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: So what
you're seeing is
the model is being brought up.
The model that is
being promoted,
and the meme that
is being constructed
is one of a quasi
technological utopia that
will blend humanity
with technology
for some form of immortality.
>>REGINA: Transhumanism.
>>STAVISH: Transhumanism.
But it is devoid of any
actual spiritual awakening.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: So it
is essentially a--
>>REGINA: You're
automatons at that point.
>>STAVISH: Well, to use the
language of the literature,
it is essentially a
demiurgic satanic entity.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I agree with that.
>>STAVISH: And as much
as some of the viewers
may object to those terms
on a knee jerk reaction,
they need to actually look
them up and understand
what I'm talking about.
These are social constraints.
These are control mechanisms,
as we said earlier,
at their ultimate.
So if we can get you hooked
in and never hooked out,
that's it.
We're done.
You're done.
It's over.
Game over.
Except for who?
The people at the top.
>>REGINA: Right.
So I think people are getting
a feeling for this now.
And so because I
want to get into some
of the ways in which we
can break that influence.
I still have so many
questions to ask you.
One of them is that,
are there certain places
on Earth, kind of
energy centers of Earth,
for example, where a collective
thought form can really
become saturated and take
on a power of its own
beyond another area?
I mean, because a lot of
times, these sacred sites
are built onto telluric lines
and so forth for a purpose.
>>STAVISH: Most likely.
Yeah.
That's it.
They're built there
for a purpose.
And the question is,
what is the thought?
Most of these places where
it's going to be densest
is going to be where the
ritual and the meditation,
the visualization has taken
place over and over again.
So it's going to be
churches or temples or even
political places, places that
have been enshrined in history.
OK?
And that's why you see a certain
repetitive paranormal phenomena
in some places.
Because the activity
that took place
at this one moment in time
is now enshrined there,
and it comes back on a psychic
repeating loop, if you will.
So those do exist.
I think for us as individuals,
what we have to look at
is our own connection into that.
And I say to folks,
one of the best things
to do is take a look at
your spiritual practice
and try to realize how
much of it is really yours
and how much of it is
from outside of you.
And there's an easy
way to do that.
If you belong to a
group, and I don't
care what it is, take
everything from that group,
take the pictures off
your walls, the statues
off your shrine, everything,
and just put it in some boxes
and put it in your closet for 30
days, maybe a month and a half,
two months, and just
put it away and don't
fill that space with
anything and just
notice how different you feel
when you're not constantly
being reinforced by those
images or by the music.
Oh, yeah, you have to
get rid of the CDs too.
>>REGINA: When it's just you.
>>STAVISH: Just you.
You have to be just you and just
alone with your own thoughts
and notice.
Then you'll know.
And the same thing,
if you've got friends
who are entrenched in the
various social movements
or political movements,
and they have
the posters, and the
buttons, and the bumper
stickers, and all
that, same thing.
Get rid of it for two months
and notice the withdrawal.
>>REGINA: OK, so
you've just issued
all of our lovely
viewers a challenge here.
OK, good.
OK, let's talk about
I know personally
even when we're talking
about transitory situations,
and how would this
play in, for example,
because I have a
similar situation that
occurred doing research for a
show I was doing on the Donner
party.
Gene Houston's husband,
Robert Masters,
had an experience
with dark entities
as he was researching for
some work he was doing
on the subject of witchcraft.
>>STAVISH: Yes, and that's
really fascinating because--
>>REGINA: These
were his beliefs.
He was just researching.
>>STAVISH: Yeah,
he was researching.
>>REGINA: He was
entering that world.
>>STAVISH: And there's
two stories here.
One is with Gustav Davidson's
book, "Dictionary of Angels."
And same thing had
occurred to him.
He said he was
bedeviled by angels
as he's writing this
book that suddenly, he's
having these encounters
and this phenomenon.
He didn't necessarily
not believe in it.
But he didn't really
believe in it.
That wasn't his purpose.
But through the
concentrated effort,
this was happening to him.
And Masters' story was
even more frightening
because his book was, I
think eros and sexuality
and witchcraft.
Again, we're back to eros.
And got some time off.
I think it's the late '60s.
He's in the Ozarks
down in Arkansas.
And he has a cabin.
He suddenly, he realized that--
I mean, it's not funny, except
for those of us who've seen it.
After a while, things
interrupt what you're doing.
He said he had phenomena
around the cabin that
was identical to his research.
I mean, the plants are dying.
He's got crows dropping
dead out of the air.
He doesn't even have
any cattle, but he's
got dead cows in front.
The creek's run dry.
His friends come over and say,
Robert, everybody else's place
is fine.
You got dead grass
all around here.
What's going on?
You got to get out of here.
So he finishes the book
and things return to normal
and he gets out.
Now your viewers are going to
say, well, but that's not me.
Well, it's not because you're
not focusing on witchcraft.
But if your are things,
what you need to understand
is that on the psychic
level, they're a flare.
You send up a signal
flare into the invisible.
I'm here and I'm paying
attention to you.
And of course, how
does the verse go?
When you look into the
abyss, the abyss looks back.
It works both ways.
When we try to find the
face of God, the face of God
is there too.
So we want to say there's
positive things there.
But it just reinforces
in a very dramatic way
the power of our thoughts that
we're completely unaware of.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
I went through a
horrible period when
I was researching for
I had to do a 10 part
series on the Donner party at
the sesquicentennial event.
And so I had to read a
number of books on it.
And well, those were like dark
missing period of my life.
It was so awful.
Now crows didn't
fall out of the sky.
I don't think anything
horrible happened.
But it did feel as though
there was something
that had been created
there that had overtaken
my psyche for the duration.
>>STAVISH: Yeah, you feel
this kind of oppressiveness.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: And
that's what happens.
Yours was very dramatic
because of the nature
of the subject matter.
I'm sure your viewers are
familiar with what the Donner
party is.
This is a very unfortunate
and horrible piece of history.
>>REGINA: Oh, it was.
I still remember
every image, yeah.
>>STAVISH: So we have that
we're it's very strong.
But that oppressive
this can be more subtle.
It can be the subtle
annoyance that you
find with that person
who you go for coffee,
and they look at you
when you put sugar
in it instead of honey.
It's that annoying new
ageism that you often
encounter with some people
once they've found the light.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: We all know people,
whether it's they've stopped
smoking, stopped drinking.
There's nothing worse
than a reformed blank.
>>REGINA: Yes, because
then it goes into judgment
and division, separation.
>>STAVISH: Yes,
that's exactly it.
>>REGINA: Exactly, yeah.
So OK.
So here's another one.
This is a similar one.
Then we're going to move on to
the how do we heal this stuff.
I was thinking of Heath
Ledger and what happened
with the actor Heath Ledger.
>>STAVISH: People
bring that up a lot.
>>REGINA: Because
of his identity
and because he would
really get into his roles
with the Joker and
this dark force.
>>STAVISH: Yeah,
this is really--
>>REGINA: And dying
right after that.
>>STAVISH: Yeah, this is
an important question,
because within classical
magic, there's something
that we call assumption
of the god form
where you visualize
a deity, and you
take on the qualities
of the deity,
and you become the deity.
You see a similar practice
in Indian and Tibetan Tantra
where you visualize the
deities, and the idea
is that you become the deity.
Well, actually,
the idea there is
that you're actualizing the
qualities that are already
inherent within yourself.
So they're both more
or less the same thing.
But the idea is that these
qualities exist not only
within you, but they also
exist in others, and therefore,
out there somewhere.
OK?
So when you have these
actors who are essentially
doing assumption
of the god form,
they're bringing
out these qualities,
and they're staying in
this role all the time,
that it becomes a force
that has the potential
to overwhelm them.
And Bruno and, of
course, Cliano points out
that artists and
actors in particular
are super vulnerable to this
power because of the emotion
that they use in
the imagination.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: See, all of this
is looked around the power
of the imagination.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: If I can
hook your imagination,
then the emotions will follow.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: And that's
why symbols and images
are so important.
OK?
So actors who do this
need to be able to they
need to be able to disengage.
They need to just get rid of it.
>>REGINA: They do, right.
>>STAVISH: They just put
it on and play the part
and know who they
are as a person.
That's what it all comes down
to, whether you're an actor,
or whether you're a millennial
involved in social justice
and getting sucked in.
>>REGINA: Or an accountant
in a corporation.
>>STAVISH: Who am I?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: That's the
question we're asking.
And each of us has to be able
to say, I am I. And what we do
is, of course, Moses, and he saw
the burning bush, and he said,
who's that?
The voice comes
back, I am that I am.
I'm thinking,
well, that probably
wasn't very informative.
But the idea is I am that
which is becoming I am.
I am existence.
I am.
Most of us don't say that.
What we do is we engage
in a kind of self hypnosis
is we say, I am and then
we fill in the blank.
And notice if you try
that, just relax and say,
I am, and notice how
quickly your mind
wants to fill the blank.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I a dad, right?
I am a writer.
I am--
>>STAVISH: All these roles.
>>REGINA: --all these
externals, roles, yeah.
>>STAVISH: And
that's what happens
with actors is if you're
playing these parts,
you need to disengage.
But occultists
and metaphysicians
and spiritual people too,
because the imagination
is so powerful, it's
very easy to begin
to believe your own propaganda.
>>REGINA: Indeed.
And so now looking at it on the
bright side of, like you said,
I am.
That's one exercise, beginning
to determine what you am,
what you are.
And I was thinking of
this, an example that's
really beautiful to me.
I have this dear friend.
He's a pop star out of
England named Craig David.
And he's just this
amazing human being.
And we met initially because
he watches all my shows,
which helped him with his
newest album really transform
and up his game even more.
And the one thing in his story
that was so beautiful to me
is that he's in England.
He's living in Southampton,
council houses, public housing.
And the buddies like to go out.
They want to drink.
At a young age,
the whole thing is
to go out and rouse up a little
bit, get drunk and so forth.
But even at a very early
age, by 16, 17, he was like,
I want to find my
voice, literally.
Beautiful voice, if you've
not seen him, beautiful.
I want to find my voice.
And so when they'd
go out, he'd say,
man, I think I'm going
to stay in and write
some lyrics tonight.
And so he managed
to keep frames,
but totally differentiated
out into the thing that
was drawing him more
than anything, which
was to learn how to
voice his voice, to learn
how to engage with his
own voice and bring it out
into the world.
And he's one of the
strongest people
I've ever seen in a world
that is just you know.
Talk about egregores of
fame, of power, of fortune,
and he never succumbed to any
of it and kept his own mind
and still has his own
mind the entire time.
To me, that was so rare.
I just fell in love with his
story and his whole person.
He's just a sweetie pie.
>>STAVISH: Well,
that's a perfect story.
Because that's really all
we're asking you to do
is sit back and
reflect on your life.
Are you doing what
you want to do?
What are your goals
and aspirations?
And is what I'm
doing now helping me?
I have a son in college.
I tell him, l said,
life's about choices.
The key to success
is time management.
I said, is what you're doing now
helping you achieve your goal?
Because if it's
not, don't do it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: But that--
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>STAVISH: --often
requires that we then
go against know the
group, the here.
I don't like that term,
but you know what I mean.
>>REGINA: Yeah, absolutely.
>>STAVISH: And it can be family.
It can be your community.
It can be the spiritual
group that you've
gotten involved with.
It can be the political group
that you've gotten involved.
Because when you go to a tent
revival or a fantastic yoga
retreat or even some social
protest, it feels great.
Why?
Because it's a hormonal event.
Adrenaline's move moving and
all this stuff's happening.
>>REGINA: Your emotions
are all moving together
in the same direction.
>>STAVISH: That's right
and you're feeling great.
And then what happens
when it's over, you crash.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: So you want to go
back and you want to get more.
But the problem is what
people don't understand
is what they're feeling
is a experience that they
can generate within themselves,
that they can experience
through their own self
realization and then self
actualization.
And that's the part I'm talking
about is the actualization.
Do what you want to do.
Now if your groups are
helping you, wonderful.
If they're not, leave
them as best you can.
You may not be able
to leave physically.
But you can begin to give
yourself that psychic space.
>>REGINA: Well, that's like what
Craig David did even as a kid.
Say, hey, I'll catch up
with you later, mates.
>>STAVISH: Catch you later.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And still follow your own path.
>>STAVISH: Yes.
>>REGINA: And this is
so hard, especially
I think now for the young
people in reactive mode.
It's so hard to
differentiate out
because they don't
know how they're
different a lot of
times any longer.
And this is challenging.
>>STAVISH: And in many ways,
it's always been that way.
We can look back through
history and see those cycles.
But the key thing is, and
you hit on it earlier,
is technology.
>>REGINA: It's the
technology, absolutely.
>>STAVISH: The
technology is the real--
that is the hook,
the line, and sinker.
>>REGINA: Well, it's
turning into news speak,
even less differentiation,
even less texture,
less expression in life.
Now, it's down to symbols
and communication by symbols.
OK, another thing you brought up
in the book that's interesting,
it was saying that as
we become, essentially,
more sectarian by
nature as religions,
throughout the world,
especially in Europe,
have really started
dropping away.
It's left a little bit of a
vacuum on one level, yeah,
the religions themselves served
as an egregore in our lives.
So how do you see
this transition
that's occurred away
from classical religions,
Catholicism in particular
throughout Europe
and Protestantism to
being freed of that?
>>STAVISH: Well, the problem
is what you do is, first thing,
to risk the wrath
of your viewers,
the notion of multiculturalism
that you hear in the West
has never existed.
It is a myth.
It has never existed
historically.
So what you see is this
notion of multiculturalism
actually means lowest
common denominator.
And the lowest
common denominator
then is consumerism.
>>REGINA: Right, absolutely.
>>STAVISH: So when
we go for this lowest
level of consumerism,
people will seek meaning.
And that meaning will
take place through
various religious or spiritual
notions or political notions.
The vacuum which is
created will be filled.
There's no question about that.
There is an effort now to
fill that vacuum in some ways
with Islam
particularly in Europe.
Here, I'm not quite certain what
it's trying to be filled with.
It's an ambiguous spiritual
but not religious notion.
>>REGINA: Well, it seems there
is a rise in fundamentalism
again though at this time.
>>STAVISH: I'm not
really seeing it.
I mean, I think
we hear about it.
The media says so.
But I'm not sure the numbers
actually bear that out.
>>REGINA: Well,
and maybe it's not
fair to say what
used to be called
fundamentalist churches,
the big super churches,
don't behave in the
same fundamentalist way.
It's almost more
as like Joel Osteen
having to do with a kind of
materialist fundamentalism
toward making a better life
and gaining wealth and God
shines on you.
When you're wealthy, it's
because God is shining on you.
So it really is working
its way, religion
working its way into the world
of material and consumption.
>>STAVISH: Well, that's a
whole interesting piece of work
there because we can go back
to the new thought movement.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>STAVISH: That's been really
a part of the Protestant ethos
for a long time.
But it's also part of
the New Age movement
because the notion
of it's your karma.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: So we have
to be careful there,
because if we have karma,
which has cause and effect,
and I have the ability
do to affect my outcomes,
then it is a way because--
>>REGINA: It is.
It's a very interesting
line to walk
because I too believe, yeah, you
manifest what you can manifest.
That's under your power
to manifest your life.
Nothing wrong with that.
Nothing wrong with manifesting
a life of prosperity.
But now it's going
into the big tents.
>>STAVISH: And historically,
I think we've seen that.
A lot of people just
don't remember it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: It's like I
mentioned this psychic research
through media that
was done in the '30s.
I mean, this,
unfortunately, falls
under the domain of the
specialists to remember it.
>>REGINA: I see.
>>STAVISH: And I think
that's where we're facing
is as these larger entities
collapse and people become,
we'll say, excessively
individualistic, see,
there there's a middle
ground between this.
It's not necessarily it's
just me and me alone,
this kind of anti-com--
or total absorption
in the group.
We have to have
this middle ground
where, where do people
healthily interact and help
each other in a healthy way?
And that's what we're trying
to find our way with now.
We're trying to find that.
And that's the tricky part.
>>REGINA: And really, it comes
down to strengthening yourself
on all levels.
And you say this in your book
along with other, as you said,
know who you are.
Take away all the symbols.
Take away the other people.
Just sit, I am, and determine
for yourself who you are.
And then you say and make all
strong and bring all of you
into harmony and in strength.
Mind, body, emotions, and
spirituality become strong.
Right?
>>STAVISH: Yes.
And then as a person,
you're able to give more.
You're able to do more.
There's nothing
better than working
with a group of
true individuals.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: Not people
pretending to be--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STAVISH: --but
people who really
are because they bring
talent and commitment
and insight and even
some good argumentation,
healthy argumentation
to the project.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STAVISH: And then the
project, it moves forward
and things get done.
So you need to be a healthy
and strong individual
because that's what spirituality
is all about, in the end.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And that's what my husband
Zeus and I really go for
and trying to join
into new community
is looking for
those individuals.
And I mean, he's a counselor of
adults and young people alike.
But one of the things
he really looks at
is with these kids who have
been stuck in this technology
mode trying to decide, do I go
to college now, sleepwalking
to the next level without
really making decisions,
just because their
parents expect it.
He's really trying to help them
break that egregore and say,
no.
Where's your genius?
He's a genius at helping
them find their genius
and start asking a completely
different set of questions
coming out of high school before
they even launch into what
their adult lives are
going to look like,
which I love seeing
what happens there.
But we have to do this
with ourselves too.
We have to take ourselves.
We have to do our due
diligence as parents
and allow our kids to
disentangle from that, really
insist that they disentangle.
Right?
>>STAVISH: Sometimes, it
requires an intervention.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STAVISH: Because
this is an addiction.
The technology is an addiction.
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
>>STAVISH: And so is the
egregore is an addiction.
And that's why I talked to you
about, fill the withdrawal.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>STAVISH: Fill the withdrawal.
As that space opens up,
you need to fill it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STAVISH: Well, you
fill it with yourself.
>>REGINA: Yeah, indeed.
We have just like a second left.
Final thought?
>>STAVISH: Just
reflect on your life.
Make sure you decide
where you want to go.
Make sure that the
activities and the people
and the things
you're involved with
are helping you
achieve your goals.
Yes, you're going to have
to give something in return.
You're going to have
to help them too.
But just say, is this
a healthy relationship
that I'm involved in?
And if the answer is
yes, stay with it.
If it's not, get out.
>>REGINA: Sage advice.
Thank you so much.
It's been a wonderful
conversation.
I've thoroughly enjoyed it.
>>STAVISH: Thank you very much.
>>REGINA: Again, the name
of the book is "Egregores,
The Occult Entities That
Watch Over Human Destiny."
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]